# ANTLR4 Calculator Example
ANTLR4 calculator example and explanation

# How do I set this up?
* Install packages using Maven (see `pom.xml`)
* This automatically generates
 the required classes through ANTLR4
* For manually updating/regenerating the required classes
 based on the grammar, you can let Maven execute the
 antlr4:antlr4 command

# How to start?
Run the main.java function and start typing your calculations.
Leave the calculation blank or type `exit` to exit the program.

# What is going on?
ANTLR4 generates Parser, Visitor and Listener
classes based on the `Calculator.g4` grammar
found in `src/main/antlr4/parser`.
These classes contain context and methods needed
for visiting the nodes in the parse tree or
for listening to events when entering or exiting
the nodes in a parse tree.
In this example, a Visitor approach has been used.

The `CalculationVisitor` is a custom class that extends
the base visitor generated by ANTLR4. In this custom class,
we can overwrite the steps taken when visiting each node
in a certain expression.

# How does the Visitor work?
The Visitor visits each node in the given parse tree.
This principle is based on the
[visitor pattern](https://refactoring.guru/design-patterns/visitor).

If the node is an expression, it tries to evaluate the expression
until terminals (in this grammar: *numbers*) are found.
For non-terminals (in this grammar: *operations*),
How the operations should be applied
is defined in the visitor's methods. If a node is visited that is
a number, it is converted to Double and returned.

In our grammar, numbers are our only terminals. They are
the only tokens that need to be converted into a Java datatype
(Double, for convenience's sake). Operations, if any, are then applied
to the returned values.

The order of operations is specified in the grammar.
This is a feature of ANTLR4 through the order
of possible matches for a certain production rule.
Labels have been added to the grammar to make it easier
to identify a rule and certain tokens by name, considerably
simplifying the work the Visitor has to do.

# Where are all the classes?
ANTLR4 generates these class files
in the target directory. You can use the
maven commands defined in the `pom.xml`.

The generated classes are output to the `target/generated-sources/antlr4` directory
and reside in the project's `parser` package.
This is due to the standard configuration of ANTLR4,
matching the location of the grammar file (`src/antlr4/parser`).
No further configuration required.

# Author
Alex Rothuis: [@arothuis](https://twitter.com/arothuis)

[arothuis.nl](arothuis.nl)
